
In 2014, in the midst of a budget crisis, Flint, Michigan switched its municipal water supply from treated water imported from Detroit to locally sourced water from the Flint River. Unfortunately, officials chose not to include standard corrosion control chemicals in the local water treatment. This led to degradation of lead service lines and an increase in water lead content to levels far above federally mandated limits. State and local officials initially denied that there was a problem, but a coalition of Flint citizens gathered evidence of the increased lead levels in both the water and in the blood of Flint children. Eventually, the activists succeeded in pressuring the government to switch the water back and supply clean water in the meantime.

In 2019, I developed and first taught a 10-week introductory statistics class at the University of Chicago which uses this water crisis as a case study. The course serves undergraduate non-STEM majors, primarily first and second-year students who want to fulfill a core mathematics requirement. It covers typical intro statistics topics, including descriptive statistics, probability, correlation and regression, and inference, but does not aim to prepare students for higher-level statistics courses. 

Students in the Flint course use statistical concepts to answer key questions about the water crisis and the conditions leading up to it. In the first unit, students use descriptive statistics to examine income inequality between the city and the surrounding suburbs. Using census data, they explore how this inequality has changed over time and between different racial groups. We pair these exercises with readings about historical drivers of such inequality, such as redlining. In the second unit, they learn about percentiles and sample size as they see how the government was able to manipulate early lead sampling data to avoid passing federal lead thresholds. In the third unit, students use probability and inference to evaluate study results showing an increase in the percentage of Flint children with elevated blood lead levels (eBLLs). In the fourth unit, students learn about regression and use this to read studies about the health effects of childhood lead exposure. Finally, in the fifth unit, students make predictions about the effects of the Flint crisis on children’s future, and compare the size of the lead effect to the effects of other causes such as poverty.



During the course, students read a memoir by the Flint pediatrician who recognized the increase in eBLLs, Dr Mona Hanna-Attisha. They also have an introductory statistics textbook as a reference. But they primarily spend their time interacting with primary sources, such as census data or lead measurements, or reading scientific articles. Because these sources are difficult, students spend a great deal of class time working in small groups to interpret their readings. For homework and final projects, students write essays in which they must use statistics in making their arguments.

My biggest challenge when teaching course has come because the Flint course touches on important but difficult issues such as poverty and structural racism. As a statistics professor, I did not come in with training in addressing such sensitive topics in the classroom. I have found my university’s Center for Teaching to be very helpful resource in giving feedback and ideas for making my classroom a safe space for learning, even as we tackle difficult concepts.

My goal in developing and teaching this course is to help students develop a sense of agency, with the citizen-scientists of Flint as a model. I hope that in their future lives, my students will have the confidence to believe they can use statistical tools and language when analyzing and addressing problems in their own communities. 

  
Resources: 

What the Eyes Don’t See: A Story of Crisis, Resistance, and Hope in an American City.  Mona Hanna-Attisha, 2018.
The Poisoned City: Flint’s Water and the American Urban Tragedy, Anna Clark. 2018
The murky tale of Flint's deceptive water data, Robert Langkjær-Bain. Significance, 2017. https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2017.01016.x
Quantiles and the Flint water crisis, by Rick Wicklin, 2017. https://blogs.sas.com/content/iml/2017/05/17/quantiles-flint-water-crisis.html


